probably the most controversial thing
that Palantir software is being used for
right now, I would say, is for
immigration enforcement um with ICE and
other other organizations. Can you talk
a little bit about how Palantir software
is integrated there?
Yeah, certainly. Um well, first I think
it's a lot of the controversy moves with
the politics. You know, we first started
working with ICE when Jaime Zapata, an
ICE agent, was assassinated in Mexico in
2011, I believe. It's either 2010 or
2011 um under the Obama administration.
And we've worked with ICE
from then on until the present moment.
Um the
the work is is structured very similar.
It's like there's information that DHS
has access to that are spread out across
the component agencies
that um humans are trying to look up.
They're literally doing searches in all
these systems. So, how do we enable them
to actually see
the whole picture and then use that for
resource allocation. So, where do we
have threats? Where should we be
allocating people? How do we prosecute
uh removal operations? Um that's, you
know, in many ways exactly what we're
doing.
So, a couple things, right? So, number
one,
I think Palantir, you have a $30 million
contract um to build a platform called
Immigration OS.
So, what kind of data that's available
to enforcement and removal operations?
>> at the border. Right.
>> Um asylum applications
or the lack of one. Um applications for
benefits. Uh so, a lot of this data
really relates to non non-permanent
resident, non-US citizens who are
interacting with various facets of DHS
uh as they come here.
So, it's data on specific encounters.
Encounters they have with border patrol,
criminal justice system, and so on. But,
does it extend to things like last known
address? Is that the kind of data in
>> When it comes to what was the address
they reported in the border encounter?
Right. What was the address they
reported when they applied for benefits?
>> Right. So, then that becomes the kind of
data that if ICE is doing a raid, they
end up using, right? To say, "Okay, we
have this person here." And so on. So,
you So, it is sort of effectuating raids
through that mechanism.
To what extent does it go
beyond that? Like, is there integration
with local law enforcement, for
instance, with any of this stuff? Okay.
But I I mean, what is the I think the
real question is zooming out a little
bit. We're working with agencies that
have lawful authorities. So, what what
data are they collecting?
That's the data we're helping them
integrate.
So, if there's a lawful authority for
them to collect the data,
you know, I don't I don't think local
law enforcement is part of this. I'm I'm
not saying I have an objection to them
being part of this. I'm I'm just saying
that No, I'm just I'm just trying to get
into I mean, I think the the sort of the
core fear that people have about Well,
there are sort of two layers of fears
that I think people have with this kind
of
domestic data collection and that are
distinct from people who just oppose
deportation.
One layer, which as far as I can tell is
sort of overstated or wrong, is that
Palantir is,
you know, again, going out and devising
>> data. Right. You're not devising, but
you're not devising systems to acquire
new new forms of data for the
government. Right.
>> Correct. But, you are creating systems
where the government has access to data,
and I I think this is important, on a
scale that no government has ever had
access to
before, right? Like, one of the unique
features of 21st century America,
digital age America, is that,
you know, it's just so much easier to
track and observe people in all kinds of
different ways. And corporate America
does that even more than the government
does, right?
But
>> so. I don't think that's the fundamental
inflection, though. I think it's really
that um
the number of decisions you're trying to
make are growing much more quickly than
your head count is growing. So, let
let's just say in the ICE case, uh you
would have had 20, roughly on the order
of 20 systems that you would have to
manually go search across.
You know, how many times
>> If you're trying to find the address the
address of someone who you want to
deport.
>> Right. Um do you think you're going
through all 20 systems? You know, maybe
you stop at 10, maybe forgot to search
some systems. So, the the entropy is
just that you're not actually able to do
the work. You know, you're fighting your
tooling the whole time. And this sort of
leads to the lack of legitimacy of the
institution. It's like you're not able
to do the thing that you're actually
supposed to do.
Of course, the complexity of this is is
growing as you're asked to do more and
more. You know, it's like maybe I was
doing 10 things before and I could do it
with the people I had. Now I have to do
a thousand things.
That means I clearly don't get to all
thousand things. And the things I get
to, I'm not doing them
well.
It's like, "Okay, well,
why are we using the human to search 20
different systems? That's clearly a
problem that technology can do. How do
we use the human to do things that are
uniquely human judge that require human
judgment?" Right. I guess I'm just
saying that I think for at least some
people, and maybe I'm among them,
there's a kind of relief in the idea
that
all of this data has multiplied so
quickly that people can't, you know,
that sort of authorities can't quite
keep up with it, right? So, if we walk
outside If we walk outside of this room
and enter, you know, Midtown Manhattan,
we are under constant surveillance. Now,
it's not all It's not government
surveillance, right? But, there's a kind
of relaxation that you can feel where
you're like, "Okay, but all of this
surveillance is, you know, distributed
across so many different public and
private entities, and unless I am
literally a terrorist, the odds that
people are going to be constantly
watching and scrutinizing me are very
low."
But, then the fear becomes, you know,
"Well, if we have this incredible way to
make it all more and more and more
efficient, then maybe privacy does start
to disappear." I don't know. What do you
make What do you make of that? There's
just two thoughts there. One is, "Well,
you know, are you saying that you feel
safer because the institutions that are
supposed to protect you are structurally
incompetent?" And that's the part where
I feel like
>> might be yes, sometimes, right?
>> Yeah. And then a consequence of that,
which, you know, I think a democracy can
decide, a consequence of that is that
they also can't do their job. They can't
protect you from the things that they're
supposed to protect you from. So, I I'd
offer another solution to this, which is
they should be really good at doing what
they're doing. And we should have a
strong ability to oversee that they're
not doing things that they're not
supposed to be doing. That's exactly
what we designed Palantir to do. So,
this wasn't our system, but I think it's
an illustrative example because it was
high profile at the time. If you go back
in time, um there were government
employees who looked up the passports of
Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama.
And they got caught. How did they get
caught?
The system they're using generates audit
logs. People are reviewing the audit
log, and, you know, did you have a
permissible use to look this up? The
answer was clearly no. And they were
they were quickly caught and terminated.
>> Right.
>> You know, and so you have to both help
uh the people who are protecting us, and
you have to empower the people who are
watching the watchers, so that they also
have asymmetrically strong technology to
ensure that there are no abuses. So, who
is watching the watchers? Like, so let's
we can stick with immigration
enforcement. Right. So, presumably
there's data and information
that is protected by privacy that that,
you know, that ICE is not supposed to be
accessing. Right.
>> So, the the first line of defense is on
the front end. Like, do you even have
authority to have this data? So, you
know, the lawyers on the front end are
you have data use agreements that
they're that they have with uh with
their own interagency data use
agreements, the authorities that
collected the data to begin with. And
then the second line of defense is after
they have the data, is are you using it
for a permitted use? And that's usually,
you know, I I don't know for every
agency this is Look, I'm a I'm a
builder, so you you consult a policy
person. But, something like the Office
of the Inspector General,
>> Right. um other law enforcement agencies
that are responsible for this.
Sometimes, depending on the context, it
can actually be counterintelligence.
It's the same the same infrastructure
that you would use to make sure that
people aren't abusing the data is how
you would also make sure that, you know,
you don't have a spy in your
organization. Right. In the end, though,
it is up to the people running those
institutions to decide
whether, you know, whether to basically
track abuses at all, right? So, and it
might be at different levels in
different agencies. But, like,
presumably in the Department of Homeland
Security,
Kristi Noem would have the authority to,
you know, track or not track abuses to
some degree, right?
>> yeah, I I think that's a little bit of a
nihilistic view. I mean, there's
statutory requirements on this. So, I
think there's a fundamental question if,
you know, I I understand the
perspective. I don't agree with it that,
"Hey, we can't trust these institutions
at all." It's like, there are rules,
they follow the rules, they're also
humans, they're infallible. But, I don't
think people are like willy-nilly
deciding whether they want to do this or
not.
>> No, I don't think so, either. I'm just
trying to frame what I think are
the most common place criticisms and
critiques and worries about how this
technology is used in the context of,
you know, the second Trump
administration. You know, I I think from
the point of view of someone someone who
is a skeptic of Palantir might say,
"Well, in the end, you are
you are putting a lot of power into the
hands of people that,
you know, this person
who thinks Donald Trump is a threat to
the Republic, right, doesn't trust."
Right. So, there is there there is there
is just a way in which you,
independent of what you think about
Trump himself, when Palantir goes to
work for a government,
US government, any other government, you
are putting yourself in the position of
trusting that government with this very
impressive technology that you've built,
right? Yeah. I I I think that's right.
That's you have to pick your customers.
>> Right. So, can I just ask then about
that about that process? Cuz I think
it's sort of interesting. Like, how
how do you calibrate that kind of
decision Like so just recently
um the UK
United Kingdom rolled out a plan to have
a new digital ID.
And [snorts] I believe the head of
Palantir in the UK said
"We don't think there's enough privacy
safeguards here and we're not going to
we're not going to cooperate with the
government on this." So that's like a an
exact example of making this kind of
sort of practical but also moral
decision-making.
What kind of thinking goes into a
decision like that?
Well, I'm probably not the best person
to comment on as the CTO but I think I'd
have to go back to the quote. I think
what
Louis Mosley said was that this is an
issue for the ballot box. Louis Mosley
is the head of Palantir in the UK.
That's right.
So um look there's a lot of discursive
interaction both internally uh at
Palantir that there's an obvious
threshold question of is this a legal
use? Is this a government that you trust
and work with?
>> Right. Uh and then beyond that it's it's
really a question of like are the
authorities there? What's the potential
for misuse?
Um are the protections there in our
software against those potential abuses?
Uh
and it is the work actually going to
lead to something meaningful? See that's
really interesting though, right? That
that he said it's a matter for the
ballot box. And again I know you're not
you're not running that decision but
it's still
as an outsider to the work your company
does
it seems like he or the larger corporate
enterprise made a judgment that
basically a political judgment that the
digital ID issue had not been adequately
litigated
by British democracy for you to
cooperate with it. Isn't that's kind of
a fascinating it's a fascinating
decision. I I mean I You should talk to
Louis about that. I would I would give
you the other side of that which is I
think a lot of the policies a lot a lot
of things that people are struggling
with right now I think in the US were
voted on at the ballot box. You know
what ISIS doing was voted on at the
ballot box.
Um so So right no so you so Palantir
>> [snorts]
>> again not that you speak for everyone at
Palantir but Palantir is more
comfortable with mass deportations in
the context of a world where Donald
Trump campaigned on mass deportations
and won
than it might be in a world where he had
not mentioned deportations at all and
then asked Palantir to design a mass
deportation abetting software. What I'm
saying is like the people voted on this.
You know that seems like a functioning
democracy there. And of course there's
going to continue to be discursive
interaction and disagreement. That's our
that's the beauty of our political
process. But it's an important
distinction. Yeah. How do how do you
think about that with foreign clients?
Like obviously Palantir does work for
the state of Israel that is again
obviously a source of controversy but so
you're making a judgment that
Israel is an appropriate a morally
appropriate partner. Yes. Do you do work
with dictator with non-democratic
governments? We we do work with the US
and our allies. It really the the nature
of the work depends particularly I think
in the coalitions that are fighting
uh terrorism the coalitions that are
pushing back on um the great power
competition that we're in
with the big four. But so would you be
un if the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia called
you up and said "We just want to build a
digital ID
system." You would be less likely to do
that work because they're not a
democratic government. Would that be
fair?
I would I would leave that up to to Alex
to figure out. It depends on their uses.
I'm not I'm not sure that's exactly
fair. I mean um is it leading to a more
efficient electronic government? You
know what's the what's the purpose of it
is the question. There's a difference of
which agency's doing it and what is
their mandate.
What data do they have? How are they
trying to
um what are the workflows they're trying
to enable?
But from the beginning right?
Just again in the name
from Lord of the Rings, right? You have
this idea that you are sort of you're
building a technology that in the story
the name originates from is used for
good and for evil.
I'm just interested in the extent to
which that kind of judgment is more than
most companies woven into
the kind of governmental work that
you're willing to do. I mean we we we we
pick our partners very carefully. Uh we
want to work on work that's important to
the West and um
that includes the commercial work we do
in reindustrializing the country.
So